== Poster (2 pages)
------------------------ Paper 168, Review 1 ------------------------

Title: OpenVanilla – A Non-Intrusive Plug-In Framework of Text Services

Reviewer:           external

Overall Rating

   2  (Probably reject: I would argue for rejecting this paper.)

Expertise

   1  (No Knowledge)

The Review

   This paper proposes extending Input Method techniques beyond Asian
   language character sets, and propose they could be useful for services
   such as a "check as you type" spell checker. It's not clear how this
   differs from predictive text-entry techniques such as T9, which is used
   for text entry in English on mobile phones. The description of
   OpenVanilla, the authors' Input Method platform, is not very detailed,
   and so it is unclear how OpenVanilla differs from and improves upon
   existing Input Method API's such as the Java Input Method Framework or
   the Microsoft Global Input Method Editors.  The abstract mentions that
   OpenVanilla enabled creating a Tibetan IM module using only 300 lines of
   code, but offers no comparison as to how many lines of code it takes to
   create that module with other IM APIs, so I can't tell how much of an
   improvement their system offers. I would suggest that the authors clarify
   the distinguishing factors between their platform and existing platforms,
   and that the authors clarify the distinction between their application
   vision and existing predictive text-entry applications. 

------------------------ Paper 168, Review 2 ------------------------

Title: OpenVanilla – A Non-Intrusive Plug-In Framework of Text Services

Reviewer:           external

Overall Rating

   3  (Borderline: Overall I would not argue for accepting this paper.)

Expertise

   2  (Passing Knowledge)

The Review

   This work considers a problem often forgotten by the Western world: how
   to handle input for languages not based on the Roman alphabet. I applaud
   the researchers' efforts to make it easier to experiment with new
   keyboard-based input methods, and would really like to see this work get
   broader exposure in the West.

   As the authors point out, given a simplified interface to developing new
   input methods, one could more easily experiment with alternative keyboard
   layouts, new methods for inputting text in any language (including Asian
   and script-based languages), and offer other, interesting services prior
   to the inputted text arriving at the application. There are a couple of
   really compelling examples in the paper: the Klingon module is great, and
   the synonym candidate list would be really useful in some situations.
   Combined with a customizable keyboard, like the new LED-based keyboard
   (http://www.artlebedev.com/portfolio/optimus), this system could provide
   a useful vehicle for research in input methods.

   The ideas in this paper are great, but for this audience, it would be
   helpful to have a bit more detail regarding the actual implementation of
   the system. For example, how does one create a new module, or how does it
   tie into the operating system.

   While my knowledge of this domain is scant, the authors may nonetheless
   wish to look at Jen Mankoff's OOPS system that helped interpret user
   input (http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/633292.633339 and
   http://www.cc.gatech.edu/fce/people/jmankoff/thesis.pdf).

------------------------ Paper 168, Review 3 ------------------------

Title: OpenVanilla – A Non-Intrusive Plug-In Framework of Text Services

Reviewer:           external

Overall Rating

   3  (Borderline: Overall I would not argue for accepting this paper.)

Expertise

   1  (No Knowledge)

The Review

   OpenVanilla aims at simplifying the creation of input methods for
   ideograph-based languages. The authors propose to also use the framework
   to develop other text services, such as a dictionary, which makes
   OpenVanilla a possible candidate for various developers and end-users.
   However, it is not clear how this framework compares to already existing
   frameworks, and it should be further investigated how well OpenVanilla is
   received by the developer community.

   The OpenVanilla icon on the left side of the poster makes the overlaid
   text difficult to read, and the thin red dotted lines on the right side
   are barely noticed.


== Doctoral Symposium (4 pages)
------------------------ Paper 150, Review 1 ------------------------

Title: Reintroducing Input Method – A Non-Intrusive Plug-In Framework of Text Services

Reviewer:           external
Overall rating:     3  (scale is 1..5; 5 is best)

Overall Rating

   3  (Borderline: Overall I would not argue for accepting this paper.)

Expertise

   4  (Expert)

The Review

   This paper describes the OpenVanilla text input method framework and
   makes a case for using input frameworks of this sort for a larger set of
   useful tasks than they were envisioned for. 

   I found the notion of transparently pluggable input transformation or
   filtering modules of the sort being proposed here an interesting idea. 
   It seems to have some potential to be developed into a sort of loosely
   coupled set of input-oriented services that could be mixed and matched by
   the user to compose new functionality.  

   However, I didn’t feel like the ideas were developed quite far enough to
   see if the concept would really offer significant advantages or suffer
   from significant drawbacks.  It also seemed that the OpenVanilla system
   as described doesn’t really appear to live up to the more general promise
   of the concept – it seems like a great system for managing a flexible set
   of text input methods, but has limitations that keep it from going much
   outside that.  Most notably, the paper points out that for simplicity in
   its primary function (an important goal) it explicitly rules out dealing
   with pointing (mouse) input, more sophisticated “candidate window”
   interfaces, or generally GUI interfaces of any sort.  Yet it would seem
   like many of the more interesting and innovative possibilities raised by
   this approach would need exactly those things to work well. 

   One concern I have about the overall concept, which I think probably
   needs to be addressed as this work goes forward, is whether the strong
   separation (and hence easy and transparent plugability, which seems to
   offer the main advantage of this approach) also represents too much of a
   drawback.  In particular, it would seem to preclude the input modules
   from making use of any information about the state of the interface it is
   working with.  This seems like a significant general limitation.  I think
   the interesting part of this work might be in demonstrating clever ways
   to get around this limitation without loosing the inherent benefits.

   Detailed comments.

   Note: for Doctoral Symposium submissions there should really just be one
   author (the Ph.D. student). 

   There are a number of grammatical problems with the paper.  This is not
   surprising since the author is likely not a native English speaker.  This
   is not a big problem and shouldn’t interfere with publication of this
   work.  However, before publication, a little editing help from a native
   speaker would probably be needed.  One place where this does have a
   noticeable impact is in the title and first sentence (both rather
   critical to the reception of the paper).  In both cases, I believe “input
   method” should really be “input methods”.  Because of this had trouble
   understanding what this paper was really going to be about until I got to
   the last sentence in the first paragraph of the introduction.

   p.2 “dead-key problems” It’s not clear to me what this is referring to.

   “
 spelling checker will be born.”  It would seem like interesting
   functionality such as this is not always going to be a simple input
   filtering, transformation, or interface generation process.  It’s
   probably going to need to interact with the user in fairly arbitrary
   ways, and in a lot of cases will really need to make use of at least some
   simple state information from the application it is attached to.  For
   example, I could imagine an input filter in this framework which provided
   a macro capability (it would record some inputs, and play them back in
   response to shortcut key presses).  This can be done at some level
   without knowing anything about the application, but to be really
   effective it might really be well served by being able to tell simple
   things like whether particular menu items it was invoking were currently
   disabled.

   “
 given that problems of keyboard is still 
” I wasn’t able to work out
   what this sentence was saying.

   “Introducing OpenVanilla”  At this point you are almost half way through
   the text.  You might be better served by introducing your tool and a
   short description of why it’s interesting considerably earlier.

   p.3 “Because there was an issue 
”  This does not bode well for claims of
   platform independence for your tool.

   p.4 “References”  There aren’t many references here, and overall this
   work has not really been tied back to prior work on input models (more
   typically associated with GUI toolkits), which I think may be quite
   relevant to this work.

------------------------ Paper 150, Review 2 ------------------------

Title: Reintroducing Input Method – A Non-Intrusive Plug-In Framework of Text Services

Reviewer:           external
Overall rating:     2  (scale is 1..5; 5 is best)

Overall Rating

   2  (Probably reject: I would argue for rejecting this paper.)

Expertise

   2  (Passing Knowledge)

The Review

   A good overview of the text input method field, and of the OpenVanilla
   framework. The idea of using support for input methods to implement text
   services like spellcheck, dictionary lookup, etc, is intriguing, but
   merely mentioned in the paper. Otherwise the paper describes a sound and
   seemingly complete engineering project. However it does not have a strong
   research contribution.

------------------------ Paper 150, Review 3 ------------------------

Title: Reintroducing Input Method – A Non-Intrusive Plug-In Framework of Text Services

Reviewer:           external
Overall rating:     2  (scale is 1..5; 5 is best)

Overall Rating

   2  (Probably reject: I would argue for rejecting this paper.)

Expertise

   3  (Knowledgeable)

The Review

   I found the paper difficult to read.  For example, the shorthand IM
   generally refers to Instant Message and Instant Messaging.  My greatest
   concern is that I do not understand the research contribution of this
   work in comparision to the engineering effort.
